Refine README (#41)
netbox-community/netbox-operator: README.md

Reviewer: We could remove this line, `>**NOTE**: Ensure that the samples have default values to test it out.` as the samples in the project have default values set.

# NetBox Operator

**Disclaimer:** This project is currently under development and may change rapidly, including breaking changes. Use with caution in production environments.

NetBox Operator extends the Kubernetes API by allowing users to manage NetBox resources – such as IP addresses and prefixes – directly through Kubernetes. This integration brings Kubernetes-native features like reconciliation, ensuring that network configurations are maintained automatically, thereby improving both efficiency and reliability.

> ![Figure 1: NetBox Operator High-Level Architecture](docs/netbox-operator-high-level-architecture.drawio.svg)

Reviewer 2: This looks odd with github in dark mode - maybe you could add a white background? also I think that there is a missing icon for k8s

<img width="1101" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e9117ed1-fbd7-4902-86eb-c4978cd1a178">

# Getting Started

## Prerequisites

- go version v1.22.0+
- docker version 17.03+
- kubectl version v1.11.3+
- Access to a Kubernetes v1.11.3+ cluster
- kind

> - docker cli

Reviewer 2: Is this not included with docker by default? Does no harm to keep though

Reviewer 3: Let's keep it since there may be users that want to use another runtime such as podman.

### Running the NetBox Operator on your machine using an existing NetBox and Kubernetes cluster

Note: This requires a running NetBox instance that you can use (e.g. <https://demo.netbox.dev>) as well as a kubernetes cluster (can be as simple as `kind create cluster`)

- Prepare NetBox (based on the demo NetBox instance):
  - Open <https://demo.netbox.dev/plugins/demo/login/> and create any user
  - Open <https://demo.netbox.dev/user/api-tokens/> and create a token "0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567" with default settings
  - Open <https://demo.netbox.dev/extras/custom-fields/add/> and create a custom field called "netboxOperatorRestorationHash" for Object types "IPAM > IP Address" and "IPAM > Prefix"
- Open a new terminal window and export the following environment variables:

    ```bash
    export NETBOX_HOST="demo.netbox.dev"
    export AUTH_TOKEN="0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567"
    export POD_NAMESPACE="default"
    export HTTPS_ENABLE="true"
    export NETBOX_RESTORATION_HASH_FIELD_NAME="netboxOperatorRestorationHash"
    ```

- Run the NetBox Operator locally `make install && make run`

## Testing NetBox Operator using samples

> In the folder `config/samples/` you can find example manifests to create IpAddress, IpAddressClaim, Prefix and PrefixClaim resources. Apply them to the cluster with `kubectl apply -f <file-name>` and use your favorite Kubernetes tools to displa.

Reviewer 4: Typo `displa`

Example of assigning a Prefix using PrefixClaim:

> ![Figure 2: PrefixClaim example with a NetBox and NetBox Operator instance deployed on the same cluster](docs/prefixclaim-sample-with-netbox-running-in-cluster.drawio.svg)

Reviewer 2: Same issues as previous figure

1. Apply a PrefixClaim: `kubectl apply -f config/samples/netbox_v1_prefixclaim.yaml`
2. Wait for ready condition: `kubectl wait prefix prefixclaim-sample --for=condition=Ready`
3. List PrefixClaim and Prefix resources: `kubectl get pxc,px`

> 4. For the prefix you’ll be able to see the URL, you can open it (login is admin/admin) to browse through the NetBox resources.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. In the prefix status fields you’ll be able to see the netbox URL of the resource. Login with the default `admin`/`admin` credentials to access the NetBox resources.
```

> Make sure to also discover the yaml output of these resources, check the events and Operator logs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Key information can be found in the yaml formatted output of these resources, as well as in the events and Operator logs.
```

# Getting Started

## Prerequisites

- go version v1.22.0+
- docker version 17.03+.
- kubectl version v1.11.3+.
- Access to a Kubernetes v1.11.3+ cluster.

## Running and developing locally

### Running the NetBox Operator and NetBox on a local kind cluster

Note: This requires Docker BuildKit.

> - Create kind cluster with a NetBox deployment: `make create-kind`
> - Port-forward NetBox: `kubectl port-forward deploy/netbox 8080:8080 -n default`
> - Open <http://localhost:8080> in your favorite browser and log in with the username `admin` and password `admin`, you will be able to access the local NetBox instance running in the kind cluster.
> - Deploy the NetBox Operator on the local kind cluster: `make deploy-kind`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Create kind cluster with a NetBox deployment: `make create-kind`
- Deploy the NetBox Operator on the local kind cluster: `make deploy-kind`

To optionally access the NetBox UI:
- Port-forward NetBox: `kubectl port-forward deploy/netbox 8080:8080 -n default`
- Open <http://localhost:8080> in your favorite browser and log in with the username `admin` and password `admin`, you will be able to access the local NetBox instance running in the kind cluster.
```

Reorder steps and added separation for accessing the UI

### Running the NetBox Operator on your machine and NetBox on a local kind cluster

- Create kind cluster with a NetBox deployment: `make create-kind`
- Port-forward NetBox: `kubectl port-forward deploy/netbox 8080:8080 -n default`
- Open <http://localhost:8080> in your favorite browser and log in with the username `admin` and password `admin`, you will be able to access the local NetBox instance running in the kind cluster.
- Open a new terminal window and export the following environment variables:

    ```bash
    export NETBOX_HOST="localhost:8080"
    export AUTH_TOKEN="0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567"
    export POD_NAMESPACE="default"
    export HTTPS_ENABLE="false"
    export NETBOX_RESTORATION_HASH_FIELD_NAME="netboxOperatorRestorationHash"
    ```

> - Run the NetBox Operator locally (in a new terminal window) `make install && make run`

Reviewer 2: This should be in the same terminal as the export statements are run else they'll not be picked up

### Running the NetBox Operator on your machine using an existing NetBox and Kubernetes cluster

Note: This requires a running NetBox instance that you can use (e.g. <https://demo.netbox.dev>) as well as a kubernetes cluster (can be as simple as `kind create cluster`)

- Prepare NetBox (based on the demo NetBox instance):
  - Open <https://demo.netbox.dev/plugins/demo/login/> and create any user
  - Open <https://demo.netbox.dev/user/api-tokens/> and create a token "0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567" with default settings
  - Open <https://demo.netbox.dev/extras/custom-fields/add/> and create a custom field called "netboxOperatorRestorationHash" for Object types "IPAM > IP Address" and "IPAM > Prefix"
- Open a new terminal window and export the following environment variables (adjust the API :

    ```bash
    export NETBOX_HOST="demo.netbox.dev"
    export AUTH_TOKEN="0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567"
    export POD_NAMESPACE="default"
    export HTTPS_ENABLE="true"
    export NETBOX_RESTORATION_HASH_FIELD_NAME="netboxOperatorRestorationHash"
    ```

> - Run the NetBox Operator locally (in a new terminal window) `make install && make run`

Reviewer 2: This should be in the same terminal as the export statements are run else they'll not be picked up

### Running the Operator on a local kind cluster

Follow the instructions to bring up a locally running kind cluster, with NetBox and a NetBox operator running within it:
- execute `make create-kind`
- execute `make deploy-kind`
- run `kubectl port-forward deploy/netbox 8080:8080 -n default`
- go to your favorite browser and type in `localhost:8080`, with the username `admin` and password `admin`, you will be able to access the local NetBox instance running in the kind cluster

### Running the Operator locally and Netbox on a local kind cluster

Follow the instructions to bring up a locally running kind cluster, with NetBox running within it but NetBox Operator running on your local machine:

- execute `make create-kind`
- run `kubectl port-forward deploy/netbox 8080:8080 -n default` to make the NetBox API available locally
- open a new terminal window and export the following environment variables:
    ```
    export NETBOX_HOST="localhost:8080"
    export AUTH_TOKEN="0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567"
    export POD_NAMESPACE="default"
    export HTTPS_ENABLE="false"
    export NETBOX_RESTORATION_HASH_FIELD_NAME="netboxOperatorRestorationHash"
    ```

> - run `make run` in a new terminal to start the netbox operator locally and accept incoming connections if a popup apears

Reviewer 4: Typo: appears

Author: thanks for spotting, fixed in https://github.com/netbox-community/netbox-operator/pull/41/commits/22d63ccdbbdfd9e5aba614f6b920dc4d03507461

- go to your favorite browser and type in `localhost:8080`, with the username `admin` and password `admin`, you will be able to access the local NetBox instance running in the kind cluster
- run `kubectl apply -f config/samples/netbox_v1_ipaddressclaim.yaml` in a new terminal window to see netbox operator in action

### Running the Operator locally sing an existing NetBox instance and Kubernetes cluster

Prerequisites:
- a NetBox instance to test against
- a Kubernetes cluster with the netbox-operator CRDs installed (point the kubeconfig to the cluster and run `make install`)

> - There are some mandatory environment variables to set to run the netbox-operator locally. Make sure they are adapted to your NetBox instance and your NetBox instance is reachable using the defined HOST:

Reviewer 4: Maybe we would like to unify the usages of operator, netbox operator, and netbox-operator in this PR :)

Author: usage unified to NetBox-Operator in https://github.com/netbox-community/netbox-operator/pull/41/commits/22d63ccdbbdfd9e5aba614f6b920dc4d03507461

    ```
    export NETBOX_HOST="localhost:8080"
    export AUTH_TOKEN="0123456789abcdef0123456789abcdef01234567"
    export POD_NAMESPACE="default"
    export HTTPS_ENABLE="true"
    export NETBOX_RESTORATION_HASH_FIELD_NAME="netboxOperatorRestorationHash"
    ```

> - run `make run` in a new terminal to start the NetBox-Operator locally and accept incoming connections if a popup apears

Reviewer 4: `typo`: apears :D

Author: -.- ... fixed in https://github.com/netbox-community/netbox-operator/pull/41/commits/d39768e96ab2a62e9e2be50d5e1d22245bf6d6f0

### Deploy the Manager to the cluster with the image specified by `IMG`

```sh

> make deploy IMG=<some-registry>/NetBox Operator:tag

Reviewer 2: This should probably be left as is

## Restoration from NetBox

> In case the cluster that contains the NetBox Custom Resources managed by this NetBox Operator is not backed up (e.g. using Velero), we need to be able to restore some information from NetBox. This includes two mechanisms implemented in this NetBox Operator:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the case that the cluster containing the NetBox Custom Resources managed by this NetBox Operator is not backed up (e.g. using Velero), we need to be able to restore some information from NetBox. This includes two mechanisms implemented in this NetBox Operator:
```

1. Build the installer for the image built and published in the registry:

```sh

> make build-installer IMG=<some-registry>/NetBox Operator:tag

Reviewer 2: this should be left as is

Users can just run `kubectl apply -f <URL for YAML BUNDLE>` to install the project, i.e.:

```sh

> kubectl apply -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/<org>/NetBox Operator/<tag or branch>/dist/install.yaml

Reviewer 2: this should be left as is
